Ruppel, Wörthmüller et al. eLife 2023;12:e83588. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.83588

1 of 42
Force propagation between epithelial 
cells depends on active coupling and 
mechano-­structural polarization
Artur Ruppel1†‡, Dennis Wörthmüller2,3†, Vladimir Misiak1, Manasi Kelkar4, 
Irène Wang1, Philippe Moreau1, Adrien Méry1, Jean Révilloud1, 
Guillaume Charras4,5,6, Giovanni Cappello1, Thomas Boudou1, Ulrich S Schwarz2,3*, 
Martial Balland1*
1Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, LIPhy, Grenoble, France; 2Institute for Theoretical 
Physics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany; 3BioQuant–Center for 
Quantitative Biology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany; 4London 
Centre for Nanotechnology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; 
5Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom; 6Institute for the Physics of Living Systems, University College 
London, London, United Kingdom
Abstract Cell-­generated forces play a major role in coordinating the large-­scale behavior of cell 
assemblies, in particular during development, wound healing, and cancer. Mechanical signals prop-
agate faster than biochemical signals, but can have similar effects, especially in epithelial tissues 
with strong cell–cell adhesion. However, a quantitative description of the transmission chain from 
force generation in a sender cell, force propagation across cell–cell boundaries, and the concomitant 
response of receiver cells is missing. For a quantitative analysis of this important situation, here we 
propose a minimal model system of two epithelial cells on an H-­pattern (‘cell doublet’). After opto-
genetically activating RhoA, a major regulator of cell contractility, in the sender cell, we measure 
the mechanical response of the receiver cell by traction force and monolayer stress microscopies. 
In general, we find that the receiver cells show an active response so that the cell doublet forms a 
coherent unit. However, force propagation and response of the receiver cell also strongly depend 
on the mechano-­structural polarization in the cell assembly, which is controlled by cell–matrix adhe-
sion to the adhesive micropattern. We find that the response of the receiver cell is stronger when 
the mechano-­structural polarization axis is oriented perpendicular to the direction of force propa-
gation, reminiscent of the Poisson effect in passive materials. We finally show that the same effects 
are at work in small tissues. Our work demonstrates that cellular organization and active mechanical 
response of a tissue are key to maintain signal strength and lead to the emergence of elasticity, 
which means that signals are not dissipated like in a viscous system, but can propagate over large 
distances.
Editor's evaluation
Using surface micropatterning, optical activation, and theoretical analysis, the authors provide 
compelling evidence that adjacent cells actively propagate mechanical stress in epithelial tissues. 
The response of the receiver cell is active and enhanced when the principal stress direction is 
perpendicular to the orientation of actin fibers. This work is important and a must read for every-
body wanting to understand tissue mechanics.
Research Article
*For correspondence: 
schwarz@thphys.uni-heidelberg.​
de (USS); 
martial.balland@univ-grenoble-​
alpes.fr (MB)
†These authors contributed 
equally to this work
Present address: ‡Centre de 
Recherche en Biologie Cellulaire 
de Montpellier, Centre National 
de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Montpellier, France
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 20
Preprinted: 03 June 2022
Received: 20 September 2022
Accepted: 07 August 2023
Published: 07 August 2023
Reviewing Editor: Karsten 
Kruse, University of Geneva, 
Switzerland
‍ ‍ Copyright Ruppel, 
Wörthmüller et al. This article 
is distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.
